proposal: TSDB Support for Start Timestamp (ST) (#60)
prometheus/proposals: proposals/0060-st-storage.md

  * [PROM-48 (Delta type)](https://github.com/prometheus/proposals/pull/48), [Delta WG](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1G0d_cLHkgrnWhXYG9oXEmjy2qp6GLSX2kxYiurLYUSQ/edit)

> TL;DR: We propose to extend Prometheus TSDB storage sample definition to include an extra int64 that will represent the start timestamp (ST) (previously called created timestamp (CT)) for the cumulative types as well for the future delta temporality ([PROM-48](https://github.com/prometheus/proposals/pull/48)).
> We propose introducing persisting ST logic behind a single flag `st-storage`. Once implemented, we could propose eventual removal of the `created-timestamps-zero-injection` experimental feature.

## Why

The main goal of this proposal is to make sure [PROM-29's created timestamp (CT)](0029-created-timestamp.md) information is reliably and efficiently stored in Prometheus TSDB, under the new chosen start timestamp (ST) name. This means ST can be:

* Written via TSDB Appender interfaces.
* Query-able via TSDB Querier interfaces.
* Persistent in WAL.
* Watch-able (WAL) by Remote Writer.

> * (eventually) Persistent in TSDB block storage.

Reviewer: We put it into blocks and handle it when compacting (head) blocks, so this should work - if not, it's a bug.

```suggestion
* Persistent in TSDB block storage.
```

* Remote storages (Remote Write 2.0) (e.g. OpenTelemetry, Chronosphere, Google).
* PromQL and other read APIs (including federation) (e.g. increased cumulative based operation accuracy).

Furthermore, it would unblock future Prometheus features for wider range of monitoring cases like:

* Delta temporality support.
* UpAndDown counter (i.e. not monotonic counters) e.g. StatsD.

On top of that this work also allow to improve some existing features, notably various edge cases for native histogram resets hints (e.g. [TSDB chunk merges](https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/issues/15346)). Arguably, ST can replace reset hint field in native histogram eventually.

### Background: ST feature

[PROM-29](0029-created-timestamp.md) introduced the created timestamp (CT) concept for Prometheus cumulative metrics. Since then [the community adopted the Start Timestamp name](https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/issues/17416).

Semantically, ST represents the time when "counting" (from 0) started. In other words, ST is the time when the counter started counting from zero.

Conceptually, ST extends the Prometheus data model for cumulative monotonic counters as follows:

> * (new) int64 Timestamp (ST): When counting started.

Reviewer: nit:

```suggestion
* (new) int64 Start Timestamp (ST): When counting started.
```

  * start_timestamp SHOULD be provided for metrics that follow counter semantics (e.g. counters and histograms).
  * Receivers MAY reject those series without start_timestamp being set.

* Otel) More detailed, but still descriptive SHOULD rule only: In OpenTelemetry data model ([temporality section](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/metrics/data-model/#sums:~:text=name%2Dvalue%20pairs.-,A%20time%20window%20(of%20(start%2C%20end%5D)%20time%20for%20which%20the,The%20time%20interval%20is%20inclusive%20of%20the%20end%20time.,-Times%20are%20specified)) ST is generally optional, but strongly recommended. Rules are also soft and we assume they are "SHOULD" because there is section of [handling overlaps](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/metrics/data-model/#overlap). However, it provides more examples, which allow us to capture some specifics:
  * Time intervals are half open `(ST, T]`.
  * Generally, ST SHOULD:

>     * `ST[i] < T[i]` (equal means unknown)

Author: We agree to deal on query time for now. For ST==T currently proposal proposes to switch to 0 ("unknown") or at least treat it as so

* This unlocks the most amount of benefits (e.g. also delta) for the same amount of work, it makes code simpler.
* We don't know if we need special cumulative best case optimization (yet); also, it would be for some "best" cases. Once we know we can always add those optimizations.

2. Similarly, we propose to not have new special ST storage cases per metric types beyond the existing difference between native histograms and float metrics. Some systems allow optional STs on gauges (e.g. OpenTelemetry). We propose keeping that storage flexibility.

3. We propose to treat ST as an *optional* data everywhere, simply because it's new and because certain metric type do not need it (gauges). For efficiency and consistency with scrape and Remote Write protocols we treat default value `int64(0)` as a "not provided" sentinel. This has a consequence of inability to provide the ST of an exact 0 value (unlikely needed and if needed clients needs to use 1m after or before.

4. Let's go through all the areas that would need to change:

### Feature flag `st-storage`

> To develop and give experimental state to users, we propose to add a new feature flag `st-storage`. Similar to [exemplar-storage]https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/feature_flags/#exemplars-storage) it will tell Prometheus to ingest ST and use new (potentially breaking compatibility) storage formats.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To develop and give experimental state to users, we propose to add a new feature flag `st-storage`. Similar to [exemplar-storage](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/feature_flags/#exemplars-storage) it will tell Prometheus to ingest ST and use new (potentially breaking compatibility) storage formats.
```
Link formatting

We propose to have a single flag for both WAL, Block storage, etc., to avoid tricky configuration.

> Notably, given persistence of this feature, similar to example storage, if users enabled and then disabled this feature, users will might be able to access their STs through all already persistent pieces e.g. WAL).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Notably, given persistence of this feature, similar to example storage, if users enabled and then disabled this feature, users will might be able to access their STs through all already persistent pieces (e.g. WAL).
```

We propose to not validate ST values on Prometheus write (Appender level). ST is treated as opaque and optional element of the sample. Prometheus will store whatever int64 value it receives, with `0` meaning **not provided**. This is a deliberate design choice, given:
* ST data in Prometheus ecosystem is a new concept. ST is expected to be missing in many cases (e.g. old SDKs, old exporters, exporters where ST is non-trivial to detect).
* ST in wider ecosystem is often unclean (mixed instrumentation, imperfect auto-generation).
* The exact consumption semantics is still experimental thus we want to stay flexible and don't block future use cases (e.g. exact semantics of ST > T).
* We can always add validation features opt-in.

> For unknown start-time reset points (e.g. OpenTelemetry cumulative points where `ST == T`), ingestion layers (such as OTLP receivers or Remote Write endpoints) are expected to map these to `0` (unknown ST) when appending to storage. This optimizes storage (0 takes exactly 1 bit in chunk/WAL formats) and simplifies detection without requiring timestamp matching.

Reviewer 2: What about the points that follow in the series? Won't those have wildly incorrect rates?

Author: Yea, I thought we decided this and AI filled this -  but it's good to unpack again. Let's stop and decide.

~Benefit of keeping ST==T vs ST==0 separate is that you know if unknown ST is on cumulative vs delta. But is that separation needed? Do we want that?~

~Naive thinking... For cumulatives, it feels it should resolve to old value detection. For delta it should treat ST==T as ST is previous T, right? Unless we detect delta vs cumulatives some other way~

EDIT: I read this as delta ST==T is converted to 0, but it's for cumulatives which we kind of have to support as 0 anyway? Why not making those consistent?

cc @vpranckaitis @krajorama what we assume on current query path? I have to catch with the latest updates there (:

Author: Actually it's only for cumulatives here... so could be ok?

It's just weird that on scrape unknown ST is 0 and from OTLP it's ST==T. We need to handle 0 anyway.

Deltas are allowed to have ST=T so this section might be what we want?

Reviewer 2: So for context, the ST == T points come from this: https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/metrics/data-model/#cumulative-streams-inserting-true-reset-points.

Consider:

* Point 1 Has `ST == T1`.  This seems OK to set start time to unknown.
* Point 2 has `ST == T1`, so interval is [T1, T2].  This seems problematic because the interval is a valid time interval.  But OTel sends the entire cumulative value with this point, so rates are way too high.

Ideally, we would somehow mark `T1` as permanently unknown for the series, so that Point 2 would also get an unknown timestamp?

Reviewer: Assuming we store ST==T as is, there are two cases at query and two ways we want to use the start time:

- the first sample is in range:
  - reset detection (works on pairs of samples): we check that ST is between sample 2 and 1 and we can also check if it was unknow at the 1st sample, so we can avoid detecting the reset
  - extrapolation: no pair to check, ignored
- the first sample is not in range
  - reset detection: we don't do it for the left side of the range
  - extrapolation: I think since the first sample wasn't in range, the zero point calculated from ST wouldn't be in range either??? so not relevant?

Author: Ah, ok, important context.

Sounds like @dashpole, you propose to optimize for another algorithm for unknown ST handling ([`true_reset_point`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/metricstarttimeprocessor#strategy-true-reset-point) vs the one we have now in Prometheus with `st-synthesis`, so [`subtract_initial_point `](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/metricstarttimeprocessor#strategy-subtract-initial-point) that arguably fits well with the traditional rate logic).

1. `true_reset_point` never worked in Prometheus, does it make sense to optimize for it now vs recommending to not use it?
2. Can we even handle `true_reset_point`? `the first sample is in range` case even.. what do we do if we see 

```
(ST1, T2),(ST3,T3) aka "true reset point", (ST3,T4)
```

Between T2 and T3 we have zero idea if there was a reset or not, we just know the source didn't know either, no? am I missing sth?

3. What if we some backend designed another one? Can we even keep up with different variations?

After all Prometheus is some backend and we could be opinionated in minimal semantics we need 🤔

Reviewer 2: My main point was that I don't think we can't make the start timestamp of _only the first point_ unknown without making all of the start timestamps after it also unknown.

I would suggest: If this case causes problems, reject points with ST == T. If it doesn't cause problems, just accept them as-is. I couldn't quite tell from @krajorama's comment above if it will actually cause issues or not.

I don't think we should introduce special handling for this case.

Reviewer 3: > My main point was that I don't think we can't make the start timestamp of only the first point unknown without making all of the start timestamps after it also unknown.

This isn't a problem for query side, and we still can recognize OTel's cumulative with unknown start time even if we modify just the first ST in the sequence.

<img width="1248" height="1680" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/39a16b66-5286-4254-9d53-bf8d29557dba" />

The image above shows how start timestamps should behave in OTel for deltas and cumulative counters. If we would compare datapoints `T1` and `T2` between delta and cumulative with unknown start time, we would see that the only difference is the value of `ST1`. However, the treatment of these two should be different: there should be a reset between `T1` and `T2` for deltas, but no reset for cumulative with unknown start time. In order to decide, we check that `ST2 == T1` to rule normal cumulative, and then we check that `ST1 == T1` to single out cumulative with unknown start time. 

Datapoints `T3` and beyond don't matter, because for deltas you can apply the same logic as in previous paragraph, and for cumulatives `ST3 < T2`.

Now what if we decided to replace `ST1 == T1` with some other value, let's say 0, but keep all the other ST values intact? Then you would still check `ST2 == T1` to rule out normal cumulative, and then you would check `ST1 == 0` to single out cumulative with unknown start time. You could even come up with some other magic number for unknowns, and then you could check `ST1 == math.MinInt64` or whatever to single out cumulative with unknown start time case.

Or to explain this in a different way: to known whether a datapoint `X` belongs to a cumulative series with unknown start time, you look whether there's a datapoint at time `ST_X`, and check if it that datapoint has unknown start time. This works in reverse: if a datapoint `Y` has unknown start time, then any datapoint that has `ST = T_Y` also belong to the same cumulative series with unknown start time. Thus you can change only the datapoint `Y`, and the change could be traced back from any other datapoint in this cumulative series, as if the change has propagated to the whole cumulative series.

---

Now, should we commit to doing such replacement? In my opinion, if we don't come up with a very good reason why it would be useful to treat `ST==T` case as a reset, then we shouldn't do that. Otherwise, we're introducing complexity for little benefit.

Reviewer: @ywwg We've implemented opaque storage of ST and the above algorithm shared by Vilius for deciding between delta and cumulative with unknown start time: https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/blob/06acd07312d4ae77ce0688624ef9c3044cad193f/promql/functions.go#L775

```suggestion
The stored ST is to be evaluated in the PromQL engine when the feature is enabled. We propose to utilize the ST for the purposes of counter reset detection and extrapolation at the beginning of time ranges.

The current reset detection takes into account only the value of two consecutive samples (`V[i-1]`, `V[i]`). We propose to take into account the start time of both samples as well. If the start time of the seconds sample is valid (`ST[i]!=0` and `ST[i]<T[i]`) and either its start time is after the previous sample (`T[i-1]<ST[i]`) or it is the same (`T[i-1]==ST[i]`), but the previous sample has a valid timestamp (`ST[i-1]!=0` and `ST[i-1]<T[i]`) then we detect a reset.

Note that this reset algorithm distinguishes between the case when a cumulative series starts with unknown timestamp (`ST[i-1]==T[i-1]`) or this is a delta series starting.

Extrapolation uses a known, in-range `ST[0]` to precisely detect the zero point of a series, instead of extrapolating.
```

│ │ [ST_delta (vs first ST) <varint>]  (only if st_marker = explicitST)           │   │
│ ├───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤   │
│ │ value <8b>                                                                    │   │
│ └───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘   │
│                                      . . .                                          │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

ST marker values:
  0 (noST)       -- sample has no start timestamp (ST=0)
  1 (sameST)     -- same ST as previous sample
  2 (explicitST) -- explicit ST, followed by ST_delta (vs first ST)
```

Similar V2 records will be created for Histogram types.

#### TSDB blocks

ST will be persisted in TSDB blocks using a new chunk encoding. The idea is to combine forces with the @roidelapluie initiative
to optimize XOR chunk around joint DoD encoding for both timestamps and value change semantics for common scenarios.

[XOR2 encoding details](https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/blob/e793b26713cc7052c7558ae6ceffaa66c2a5b39f/tsdb/docs/format/chunks.md#xor2-chunk-data)

> 

Reviewer: Missing reference to work on native histograms storage. https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/pull/18609

Author: Done

This proves that it's worth considering delta when designing a ST feature support.

### Background: ST characteristics for cumulative vs delta

[Previous section](#background-delta-temporality) argues that conceptually the ST logic can be used to implement both cumulatives and deltas. This is why typically they are stored in the same "field" in other system APIs and storages (e.g. [start time](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/blob/d53c5c6fca40cba8d5d5cc4db0d719a07be927f8/opentelemetry/proto/metrics/v1/metrics.proto#L399) in OpenTelemetry).

The notable difference for cumulative vs delta samples is the dynamicity **characteristics** of this timestamp.

* For the cumulative we expect ST to change on every new counter restart, so:
  * Average: in the order of ~weeks/months for stable workloads, ~days/weeks for more dynamic environments (Kubernetes).
  * Best case: it never changes (infinite count) e.g days_since_X_total.
  * Worse case: it changes for every sample.
* For the delta we expect ST to change for every sample.

### Background: Official ST semantics

> There are certain semantic constraints on ST values to make them useful for consumers of the known metric types and semantics. Different systems generally have similar semantics, but details and how strong (or practically enforced) those rules are may differ. Let's go through state-of-the-art, just to have an idea what we could propose for Prometheus ST enforcement (if anything):

Reviewer: nit: there's no way to avoid proposing something as we have to write the code and it should be deterministic.

```suggestion
There are certain semantic constraints on ST values to make them useful for consumers of the known metric types and semantics. Different systems generally have similar semantics, but details and how strong (or practically enforced) those rules are may differ. Let's go through state-of-the-art, just to have an idea what we could propose for Prometheus ST enforcement:
```

  * start_timestamp SHOULD be provided for metrics that follow counter semantics (e.g. counters and histograms).
  * Receivers MAY reject those series without start_timestamp being set.

* Otel) More detailed, but still descriptive SHOULD rule only: In OpenTelemetry data model ([temporality section](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/metrics/data-model/#sums:~:text=name%2Dvalue%20pairs.-,A%20time%20window%20(of%20(start%2C%20end%5D)%20time%20for%20which%20the,The%20time%20interval%20is%20inclusive%20of%20the%20end%20time.,-Times%20are%20specified)) ST is generally optional, but strongly recommended. Rules are also soft and we assume they are "SHOULD" because there is section of [handling overlaps](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/metrics/data-model/#overlap). However, it provides more examples, which allow us to capture some specifics:
  * Time intervals are half open `(ST, T]`.
  * Generally, ST SHOULD:
    * `ST[i] < T[i]` (equal means unknown)
    * For a cumulative, ST SHOULD:
      * Be the same across all samples for the same count:

      ```
      ST[0], T[0]
      ST[0], T[1]
      ST[0], T[2]
      ```

>   * For delta, ST SHOULD (`=` because it looks the start time is exclusive):

Reviewer: nit: sentence doesn't make sense to me (non native speaker)

```suggestion
  * For delta, ST SHOULD (`=` because time intervals are half open):
```

* Expand or motivate the non-monotonic counter feature.

## How

Native ST support may feel like a big change with a lot of implications. However, we have all the technical pieces to do this, especially if we implement ST with
(more or less) the same guarantees and details as normal sample timestamp (T), just optional.

General decisions and principles affecting smaller technical parts:

1. We propose to stick to the assumption that ST can change for every sample and don't try to prematurely optimize for the special cumulative best case. Rationales:

* This unlocks the most amount of benefits (e.g. also delta) for the same amount of work, it makes code simpler.
* We don't know if we need special cumulative best case optimization (yet); also, it would be for some "best" cases. Once we know we can always add those optimizations.

2. Similarly, we propose to not have new special ST storage cases per metric types beyond the existing difference between native histograms and float metrics. Some systems allow optional STs on gauges (e.g. OpenTelemetry). We propose keeping that storage flexibility.

> 3. We propose to treat ST as an *optional* data everywhere, simply because it's new and because certain metric type do not need it (gauges). For efficiency and consistency with scrape and Remote Write protocols we treat default value `int64(0)` as a "not provided" sentinel. This has a consequence of inability to provide the ST of an exact 0 value (unlikely needed and if needed clients needs to use 1m after or before.

Reviewer: nit: I've always heard people say 1 millisecond before or after , not 1 minute.

```suggestion
3. We propose to treat ST as an *optional* data everywhere, simply because it's new and because certain metric type do not need it (gauges). For efficiency and consistency with scrape and Remote Write protocols we treat default value `int64(0)` as a "not provided" sentinel. This has a consequence of inability to provide the ST of an exact 0 value (unlikely needed and if needed clients needs to use 1ms after or before.
```

4. Let's go through all the areas that would need to change:

### Feature flag `st-storage`

To develop and give experimental state to users, we propose to add a new feature flag `st-storage`. Similar to [exemplar-storage](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/feature_flags/#exemplars-storage) it will tell Prometheus to ingest ST and use new (potentially breaking compatibility) storage formats.

We propose to have a single flag for both WAL, Block storage, etc., to avoid tricky configuration.

> Notably, given persistence of this feature, similar to example storage, if users enabled and then disabled this feature, users will might be able to access their STs through all already persistent pieces (e.g. WAL).

Reviewer: nit:

```suggestion
Notably, given persistence of this feature, similar to example storage, if users enabled and then disabled this feature, users might be able to access their STs through all already persistent pieces (e.g. WAL).
```

This feature could be considered to be switched to opt-out, only after it's finished (this proposal is fully implemented) stable, provably adopted and when the previous LTS Prometheus version is compatible with this feature.

#### Interaction with `created-timestamps-zero-injection`

> The existing zero-injection feature is useful and has been around long enough that some large users are relying on it. The new ST support will be in addition to or an alternative to zero-injection. In order to better differentiate zero-injection from st-per-sample, we propose to rename `created-timestamps-zero-injection` to `start-time-injection-at-scrape`.

Reviewer: Let's not use "or". I propose to define it as an addition feature that does its thing after the zero-injection. This is consistent with the sentence about precedence later "In the case where a series has both scrape-injected zeroes and st-per-sample, the scrape-injected zeros take precedence.".

I'm not sure about the rename, even though maybe I brought it up in the meeting, let's just move the rename question to a normal issue in Prometheus. See also discussion in this [comment](https://github.com/prometheus/proposals/pull/87/changes#r3501637629).

```suggestion
The existing zero-injection feature is useful and has been around long enough that some large users are relying on it. The new ST support will be an additional feature situated in the ingestion pipeline *after* the zero-injection feature.
```

Author: Yea, I think we should ensure options in scrape config follow "ST" but given ff flag should go away with eventual stability I'd propose keeping it -- could be separate discussion, yes. 👍🏽

> We also propose that the st setting be be tri-state on a per-series basis. Start Time per Sample support can be either `off`, `scrape`, or `per-sample`. Large installations may have a mix of implementations and there is no compatibility concern with having series have differing settings.

Reviewer: Migrations are hard, I'm not sure it helps that much to have a per-series setting. I'd keep it to on/off in  global scrape config and per scrape config. 

Also this question is not related to the section it's in, let's add a "Configuration" section *before* this one that defines what configuration options we want. And we can then define how this section impacts the configuration if at all.

Related to [comment](https://github.com/prometheus/proposals/pull/87/changes#r3501652436).

Author: Added Config section.

> In the case where a series has both scrape-injected zeroes and st-per-sample, the scrape-injected zeros take precedence.

Reviewer: To keep these two features separate, my idea of precedence would be to set ST to 0 when zero-inject is enabled at scrape time. So that effectively the ST feature doesn't do anything afterwards.

Author: What's wrong with having both? Is it because ST=T on 0(fake) @ [ST, ST], right?

Author: Mentioned that in the text.

Reviewer: Yes, `ST[i]==T[i]` for the zero sample is one aspect, the other is the explicit ask from stakeholder (@SuperQ ) to not cause overhead when they choose to do zero inject instead.

Reviewer: The wording isn't explicit about this , but @bwplotka you've resolved my comment. Do we want to state it or defer and keep somewhat vague?

Reviewer: Discussed in chat. Since the options will be scrape level , you can totally just turn off st on the scrape where you want only zero injection.
